doc/examples.md, before:

Examples
========

This page demonstrates the primary usage of DTail. Please also see `--help` for more available options.

## Table of contents

* How to use `dtail` to follow logs
* How to use `dtail` to aggregate logs
* How to use `dcat`
* How to use `dgrep`
* How to use `dmap`
* How to use the DTail serverless mode

## How to use `dtail`

### Following logs

The following example demonstrates how to follow logs of multiple servers at once. The server list is provided as a flat text file. The example filters all records containing the string `INFO`. Any other Go compatible regular expression can also be used instead of `INFO`.

```shell
% dtail --servers serverlist.txt --grep INFO --files "/var/log/dserver/*.log"
```

Hint: you can also provide a comma separated server list, e.g.: `servers server1.example.org,server2.example.org:PORT,...`

![dtail](dtail.gif "Tail example")

Hint: You can also use the shorthand version (omitting the `--files`)

```shell
% dtail --servers serverlist.txt --grep INFO "/var/log/dserver/*.log"
```

### Aggregating logs

To run ad-hoc map-reduce aggregations on newly written log lines you must add a query. The following example follows all remote log lines and prints out every few seconds the result to standard output.

Hint: To run a map-reduce query across log lines written in the past, please use the `dmap` command instead.

```shell
% dtail --servers serverlist.txt \
    --files '/var/log/dserver/*.log' \
    --query 'from STATS select sum($goroutines),sum($cgocalls),last($time),max(lifetimeConnections)'
```

Beware: For map-reduce queries to work, you have to ensure that DTail supports your log format. You can either use the ones already defined in `internal/mapr/logformat` or add an extension to support a custom log format.

![dtail-map](dtail-map.gif "Tail mapreduce example")

Hint: You can also use the shorthand version:

```shell
% dtail --servers serverlist.txt \
    --files '/var/log/dserver/*.log' \
    'from STATS select sum($goroutines),sum($cgocalls),last($time),max(lifetimeConnections)'
```
Here is another example:

```shell
% dtail --servers serverlist.txt \
    --files '/var/log/dserver/*.log' \
    --query 'from STATS select $hostname,max($goroutines),max($cgocalls),$loadavg,lifetimeConnections group by $hostname order by max($cgocalls)'
```

![dtail-map](dtail-map2.gif "Tail mapreduce example 2")

## How to use `dcat`

The following example demonstrates how to cat files (display the full content of the files) of multiple servers at once.

As you can see in this example, a DTail client also creates a local log file of all received data in `~/log`. You can also use the `noColor` and `-plain` flags (this all also work with other DTail commands than `dcat`).

```shell
% dcat --servers serverlist.txt --files /etc/hostname
```

![dcat](dcat.gif "Cat example")

Hint: You can also use the shorthand version:

```shell
% dcat --servers serverlist.txt /etc/hostname
```

## How to use `dgrep`

The following example demonstrates how to grep files (display only the lines which match a given regular expression) of multiple servers at once. In this example, we look after some entries in `/etc/passwd`  This time, we don't provide the server list via an file but rather via a comma separated list directly on the command line. We also explore the `-before`, `-after` and `-max` flags (see animation).

```shell
% dgrep --servers server1.example.org:2223 \
    --files /etc/passwd \
    --regex nologin
```

Generally, `dgrep` is also a very useful way to search historic application logs for certain content.

![dgrep](dgrep.gif "Grep example")

Hint: `-regex` is an alias for `-grep`.

## How to use `dmap`

To run a map-reduce aggregation over logs written in the past, the `dmap` command can be used. The following example aggregates all map-reduce fields `dmap` will print interim results every few seconds. You can also write the result to an CSV file by adding `outfile result.csv` to the query.

```shell
% dmap --servers serverlist.txt \
    --files '/var/log/dserver/*.log'
    --query 'from STATS select $hostname,max($goroutines),max($cgocalls),$loadavg,lifetimeConnections group by $hostname order by max($cgocalls)'
```

Remember: For that to work, you have to make sure that DTail supports your log format. You can either use the ones already defined in `internal/mapr/logformat` or add an extension to support a custom log format. The example here works out of the box though, as DTail understands its own log format already. 

![dmap](dmap.gif "DMap example")

## How to use the DTail serverless mode

Until now, all examples so far required to have remote server(s) to connect to. That makes sense, as after all DTail is a *distributed* tool. However, there are circumstances where you don't really need to connect to a server remotely. For example, you already have a login shell open to the server an all what you want is to run some queries directly on local log files.

The serverless mode does not require any `dserver` up and running and therefore there is no networking/SSH involved. 

All commands shown so far also work in a serverless mode. All what needs to be done is to omit a server list. The DTail client then starts in serverless mode.

### Serverless map-reduce query

The following `dmap` example is the same as the previously shown one, but the difference is that it operates on a local log file directly:

```shell
% dmap --files /var/log/dserver/dserver.log
    --query 'from STATS select $hostname,max($goroutines),max($cgocalls),$loadavg,lifetimeConnections group by $hostname order by max($cgocalls)'
```

As a shorthand version the following command can be used:

```shell
% dmap 'from STATS select $hostname,max($goroutines),max($cgocalls),$loadavg,lifetimeConnections group by $hostname order by max($cgocalls)' /var/log/dsever/dserver.log
```

You can also use a file input pipe as follows:

```shell
% cat /var/log/dserver/dserver.log | \
    dmap 'from STATS select $hostname,max($goroutines),max($cgocalls),$loadavg,lifetimeConnections group by $hostname order by max($cgocalls)'
```

### Other serverless commands

The serverless mode works transparently with all other DTail commands. Here are some examples:

```shell
dtail /var/log/dserver/dserver.log
```

```shell
dtail --logLevel trace /var/log/dserver/dserver.log
```

```shell
dcat /etc/passwd
```

```shell
dcat --plain /etc/passwd > /etc/test
# Should show no differences.
diff /etc/test /etc/passwd 
```

```shell
dgrep --regex ERROR --files /var/log/dserver/dsever.log
```

```shell
dgrep --before 10 --after 10 --max 10 --grep ERROR /var/log/dserver/dsever.log
```

Commit message:

link from example docs to query language and log format docs

doc/examples.md, after:

Examples
========

This page demonstrates the primary usage of DTail. Please also see `--help` for more available options.

## Table of contents

* How to use `dtail` to follow logs
* How to use `dtail` to aggregate logs
* How to use `dcat`
* How to use `dgrep`
* How to use `dmap`
* How to use the DTail serverless mode

## How to use `dtail`

### Following logs

The following example demonstrates how to follow logs of multiple servers at once. The server list is provided as a flat text file. The example filters all records containing the string `INFO`. Any other Go compatible regular expression can also be used instead of `INFO`.

```shell
% dtail --servers serverlist.txt --grep INFO --files "/var/log/dserver/*.log"
```

Hint: you can also provide a comma separated server list, e.g.: `servers server1.example.org,server2.example.org:PORT,...`

![dtail](dtail.gif "Tail example")

Hint: You can also use the shorthand version (omitting the `--files`)

```shell
% dtail --servers serverlist.txt --grep INFO "/var/log/dserver/*.log"
```

### Aggregating logs

To run ad-hoc map-reduce aggregations on newly written log lines you must add a query. The following example follows all remote log lines and prints out every few seconds the result to standard output.

Hint: To run a map-reduce query across log lines written in the past, please use the `dmap` command instead.

```shell
% dtail --servers serverlist.txt \
    --files '/var/log/dserver/*.log' \
    --query 'from STATS select sum($goroutines),sum($cgocalls),last($time),max(lifetimeConnections)'
```

Beware: For map-reduce queries to work, you have to ensure that DTail supports your log format. Check out the [query language](./querylanguage.md) and [log formats](./logformats.md) for more information.

![dtail-map](dtail-map.gif "Tail mapreduce example")

Hint: You can also use the shorthand version:

```shell
% dtail --servers serverlist.txt \
    --files '/var/log/dserver/*.log' \
    'from STATS select sum($goroutines),sum($cgocalls),last($time),max(lifetimeConnections)'
```
Here is another example:

```shell
% dtail --servers serverlist.txt \
    --files '/var/log/dserver/*.log' \
    --query 'from STATS select $hostname,max($goroutines),max($cgocalls),$loadavg,lifetimeConnections group by $hostname order by max($cgocalls)'
```

![dtail-map](dtail-map2.gif "Tail mapreduce example 2")

## How to use `dcat`

The following example demonstrates how to cat files (display the full content of the files) of multiple servers at once.

As you can see in this example, a DTail client also creates a local log file of all received data in `~/log`. You can also use the `noColor` and `-plain` flags (this all also work with other DTail commands than `dcat`).

```shell
% dcat --servers serverlist.txt --files /etc/hostname
```

![dcat](dcat.gif "Cat example")

Hint: You can also use the shorthand version:

```shell
% dcat --servers serverlist.txt /etc/hostname
```

## How to use `dgrep`

The following example demonstrates how to grep files (display only the lines which match a given regular expression) of multiple servers at once. In this example, we look after some entries in `/etc/passwd`  This time, we don't provide the server list via an file but rather via a comma separated list directly on the command line. We also explore the `-before`, `-after` and `-max` flags (see animation).

```shell
% dgrep --servers server1.example.org:2223 \
    --files /etc/passwd \
    --regex nologin
```

Generally, `dgrep` is also a very useful way to search historic application logs for certain content.

![dgrep](dgrep.gif "Grep example")

Hint: `-regex` is an alias for `-grep`.

## How to use `dmap`

To run a map-reduce aggregation over logs written in the past, the `dmap` command can be used. The following example aggregates all map-reduce fields `dmap` will print interim results every few seconds. You can also write the result to an CSV file by adding `outfile result.csv` to the query.

```shell
% dmap --servers serverlist.txt \
    --files '/var/log/dserver/*.log'
    --query 'from STATS select $hostname,max($goroutines),max($cgocalls),$loadavg,lifetimeConnections group by $hostname order by max($cgocalls)'
```

Remember: For that to work, you have to make sure that DTail supports your log format. You can either use the ones already defined in `internal/mapr/logformat` or add an extension to support a custom log format. The example here works out of the box though, as DTail understands its own log format already. 

![dmap](dmap.gif "DMap example")

## How to use the DTail serverless mode

Until now, all examples so far required to have remote server(s) to connect to. That makes sense, as after all DTail is a *distributed* tool. However, there are circumstances where you don't really need to connect to a server remotely. For example, you already have a login shell open to the server an all what you want is to run some queries directly on local log files.

The serverless mode does not require any `dserver` up and running and therefore there is no networking/SSH involved. 

All commands shown so far also work in a serverless mode. All what needs to be done is to omit a server list. The DTail client then starts in serverless mode.

### Serverless map-reduce query

The following `dmap` example is the same as the previously shown one, but the difference is that it operates on a local log file directly:

```shell
% dmap --files /var/log/dserver/dserver.log
    --query 'from STATS select $hostname,max($goroutines),max($cgocalls),$loadavg,lifetimeConnections group by $hostname order by max($cgocalls)'
```

As a shorthand version the following command can be used:

```shell
% dmap 'from STATS select $hostname,max($goroutines),max($cgocalls),$loadavg,lifetimeConnections group by $hostname order by max($cgocalls)' /var/log/dsever/dserver.log
```

You can also use a file input pipe as follows:

```shell
% cat /var/log/dserver/dserver.log | \
    dmap 'from STATS select $hostname,max($goroutines),max($cgocalls),$loadavg,lifetimeConnections group by $hostname order by max($cgocalls)'
```

### Other serverless commands

The serverless mode works transparently with all other DTail commands. Here are some examples:

```shell
dtail /var/log/dserver/dserver.log
```

```shell
dtail --logLevel trace /var/log/dserver/dserver.log
```

```shell
dcat /etc/passwd
```

```shell
dcat --plain /etc/passwd > /etc/test
# Should show no differences.
diff /etc/test /etc/passwd 
```

```shell
dgrep --regex ERROR --files /var/log/dserver/dsever.log
```

```shell
dgrep --before 10 --after 10 --max 10 --grep ERROR /var/log/dserver/dsever.log
```
